# Data compression program

These are simple programs wrote for 'Data compression' course on University of Wrocław.

## Compilation

`make all` will build all programs.

## Usage

There are few versions of the programs, each one of them is using different sorting algorithm.

```
compress-{lexi,uni,suffix} input_file output_file block_size
```

Default block size is 256 bytes.

```
decompress{0,1} input_file output_file block_size
```

Default block size is 256 bytes.

## Compression

 * `compress-lexi` is using **lexi**cographical sorting algorithm. Thus, if we are sorting all shifts of string of length n, it's roughly O(n^2).
 * `compress-uni` is algorithm proposed on my **uni**versity course. It's O(n*logn) and it's kind of lexicographical sorting, but using the fact that all of sorted strings are just a shifts.
 * `compress-suffix`. This algorithm just builts the **suffix** tree and by looking it left to right we get sorted strings. However, we assume that there's a # letter at the end. By `#` we mean letter bigger than any other letter in used alphabet. Thus, this algorithm doesn't sort all shifts of the given string, but it sorts it's suffixes.

## Decompression

There are two programs for decompression:

 * `decompress0` - use that one, when you are decompressing from `compress-lexi` or `compress-uni`.
 * `decompress1` - use this one, when you are decompressing from `compress-suffix`.

Obviously, one could made only one decompression program, which detects which sorting algorithm was used. We just would have to include a fingerprint of the sorting algorithm in the beginning of compressed file.

However, remember that this is only a university project. Thus it doesn't have best file structure and somewhere DRY is violated (pretty much only in compress-* and decompress* files).

## Experiments

Whole purpose of this programs are experiments. That's why we have another script here, `runtests.rb`. It needs ruby to be ran. I was using Ruby 2.2.2, but all rubies >= 1.9.3 should be fine.

To run tests, run:

```
./runtests.rb <test_suit_name>
```

If test_suit_name is not provided, it's assumed to be one named `default`.

All test suites are defined in the top section of the file. Ruby is very readable language, so you should not have problems with understanding and modifying test suites.

Included test suites:

 * `default` - test suite used to test correctness of my programs. Mostly tests with sizes crafted to detect different off-by-one errors. Runs all of the algorithms with small sizes (256, 1024 bytes)
 * `rfc` - this test suite was created for purpose of testing how our programs compress bigger text files. There are 14 text files, each one of them include content of 500 RFC documents. These are pretty big files, most of them have 25-30MB. This was my favourite test for testing speed differences between `uni` and `suffix` algorithms.
 * `mobi`, `epub`, `pdf` - all of these are similar. Each one of them consists of 20 files in given format. I don't include in the repository as these were my personal ebooks. I used these plans to check efficiency (compression level) of given file formats.
 * `bin` - bunch of binary files generated with `dd` tool. I think I will prepare script for generating these. These were 3-5MB in size.
 * `trzysta` - these also were generated by `dd`. However, they were all small (300B) files, I generated a thousand of them to have many random examples. I used them with hope that maybe they will show me some bugs.

## Possible optimizations

Here I include possible optimizations which come to my mind, but I didn't have enough time and/or enthusiasm to introduce.

 * Dynamic huffman implementation which I am using here was found in the internet. It assumes that input is integers - rewriting it to accept one-byte-long unsigned chars could be beneficial.
 * Most of the classes could be rewritten using templates
 * Cache-line optimizations. Probably the suffix algorithm is the one which could gain here the most, as this is the one which access memory in pretty random way.
 * inlining simple functions
 * different MoveToFront implementation - it may be that implementation which use array instead of linked list will be much faster (both of them are O(n), but array have bigger constant) because of caching.

It should be noted that, for example in suffix implementation, sorting part of the algorithm and MTF phase take roughly similar amount of time. Huffman encoding takes a row of magnitude less time. Also, I am writing here about CPU time, not real time, so `Huffman <-> Filesystem` communication may be good place to seek for improvements.
